---
published: "2021-12-05"
date: "2021-12-05"
title: Sunday Selection 2021-12-05
tags: ["Sundays", "Buddhism","Television"]
---

I saw the first signs of ice on the local water bodies while on a walk today. It
may not technically be winter yet, but it’s definitely coming. The days are
getting short, uncomfortably short, and though I am a fan of brisk winter
weather, I also like the sun being out. Thankfully it hasn’t been too cloudy
yet, so I make it a point to get out at least for a walk every day. But all that
being said, I see myself spending a lot more time at home and indoors in
general. Which brings me to:

**[Do Dishes, Rake Leaves: The Wisdom of the Ancient
Homemakers](https://www.lionsroar.com/do-dishes-rake-leaves-and-dont-forget-the-endless-loads-of-laundry-march-2010/
"Do Dishes, Rake Leaves")**

I’ll freely admit that housework is an acquired taste for me, and even today I
try to keep most of it limited to one or two days a week. But I also like the
end result, so I’ve been trying to dislike it less. And being mindful of what
I’m doing helps. While you should definitely go read the whole thing, this
excerpt gets to the point:

Nothing is worth the measure we give it, because worth doesn’t really exist. It
is a figment of our judging minds, an imaginary yardstick to measure the
imaginary value of imaginary distinctions, and one more way we withhold
ourselves from the whole enchilada of life that lies before us.

If nothing is worth it, why cook? Why shop and chop, boil and toil and clean up
after? To engage yourself in the marvel of your own being. To see the priceless
in the worthless. To find complete fulfillment in being unfilled. And to eat
something other than your own inflated self-importance. That’s what we empty
when we empty the bowl, and a busy kitchen gives us the chance to empty
ourselves many times a day.

**[MD Nichrome: on Spacing and Sci-Fi](https://www.mass-driver.com/article/md-nichrome-on-spacing-and-sci-fi "MD Nichrome: on Spacing and Sci-Fi")**

This article combines a number of my favorite things: science fiction,
typefaces, design and art history. It’s a long read, but chock-full of
beautiful, well-researched images and examples. If you want to learn a decent
amount of history about design and typefaces used in science fiction, and also
see a typeface come into being, pour yourself a fresh cup coffee and get
comfortable!

**[Things Learned
Blogging](https://blog.jim-nielsen.com/2021/things-learned-blogging/ "Things
Learned Blogging") and [How to
Blog](https://macwright.com/2019/02/06/how-to-blog.html "How to Blog")**

It’s getting to the end of a year, sadly another year where I realize that I
wrote much less than I would have liked to. Though I don’t agree with all the
things (especially the parts about technology**, I agree with the general theme.
In particular, one of the reasons I started writing Sunday Selections was as a
forcing function to write regularly, though unfortunately that happens less
often than I like. Again, new year, new hopes. We’ll see.

**[Lost in Space Season 3](https://www.netflix.com/watch/80104198 "Lost in Space Season 3")**

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/4kHHN0cQS10"
title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay;
clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
allowfullscreen></iframe>

Lost in Space is one of my favorite recent science fiction TV shows. I don't
like it quite as much The Expanse, but it's a close second. I think it's a big
improvement on the original and does a very good job of updating the characters
and themes and introducing interesting storylines. It's not perfect, the
characters are a little one-dimensional, and there are some plot holes, but
overall I enjoy it a lot.
