---
published: "2021-08-01"
date: "2021-08-01"
title: Sunday Selection 2021-08-01
tags: ["Sundays"]
---

We've had a couple days of actually good summer weather here, though we have a
week of cloudiness to look forward to. I've been using the good weather to
replenish my Vitamin D stores. Yesterday I ended up walking for 5 miles, got
some ice cream, ate it outside and took a chunk out of my backlog of [Brain
Pickings](https://www.brainpickings.org/ "Brain Pickings") articles. And that
brings us to our first selection of the week:

**[The Woman Who Saved the
Hawks](https://www.brainpickings.org/2021/04/29/rosalie-edge/ "The Woman Who
Saved the Hawks")**

Though ostensibly focused on pioneering conservator Rosalie Edge, and her
featuring in the book Beloved Beasts, Brain Pickings writer Maria Popova gives
us also gives us a glimpse into the start of the conservation movement, through
the eyes of Edge, Rachel Carson, and a number of both beautiful and horrifying
images of birds. My long walk yesterday took me through some protected wetlands,
and yes, gave me glimpses of a number of birds along the way, making this
article particularly timely.

**[How to Find Focus](https://thesephist.com/posts/focus/ "How to Find Focus")**

Like a lot of people, the last few years have done a number on my ability to
focus. Even before the pandemic and political turmoil of 2020 and early 2021,
doomscrolling, the addictive, engineered dopamine hits of social media
threatened to make any kind of deep focus a thing of the past. While I'm working
on improving my focus in the short time (mostly by staying offline as much as
possible), this article talks about focus on longer timescales: focus (or
perhaps more accurately, direction) can be a result of exploring a number of
options first, and then deciding which ones are best for you.

**[In Times of Crisis, Draw Upon the Strength of
Peace](https://www.lionsroar.com/in-times-of-crisis-draw-upon-the-strength-of-peace/
"In Times of Crisis, Draw Upon the Strength of Peace")**

While I've been enjoying the last few days, it's not lost on me that we live in
complicated times (socially, politically, environmentally) and that we are
likely to continue to do so for the foreseeable future. These times will be
marathons, not sprints, especially if we want to achieve lasting positive
change, and not just survival. In that light, it's important to "put on your own
oxygen mask first", make sure you do the things needed to ground yourself and
maintain your own sanity and safety. As this article tells us, there is no way
to peace, peace is the way. (An Anti-Mandalorian credo of sorts?)
