---
date: 2025-03-09T12:11:58+05:30 
published: 2025-03-09T12:11:58+05:30 
title: Sunday Selection 2025-03-09
description: A smattering of homegrown websites
tags: ["Books", "Sundays", "Websites"]
---

It's March, but it feels like my year is just starting (for reasons I may dive
into at a later date). It feels like I'm in a prolonged spring cleaning session,
at least for my digital life. This year I want to more seriously get into
digital photography, and I'm starting by moving old photos off of various SD
cards into a Lightroom catalog. I'm going through all the emails that have piled
up in one of my email accounts, deleting a lot of them, and unsubscribing from
all the lists that are no longer relevant to me. I'm also digging through a ton
of tabs and bookmarks, reading things that have been waiting for a while, and
closing them out. So the next few editions of Sunday Selection will be populated
from my massive tab backlog. 

**[Gina Trapani's Life in Weeks](https://weeks.ginatrapani.org)**

A lovely little piece of digital art tracking major events in Gina Trapani's
life, a week at a time. Personally I feel like I have a pretty bad memory for
things that have happened in my life, and having something like this would be a 
good way to keep track of things that have kept track of things in my life. This
version is based on a [similar page by Buster Benson](https://busterbenson.com/life-in-weeks), which links to its source
code, if you want to make a version for itself.

**[Why I Choose Lua for this
Blog](https://andregarzia.com/2025/03/why-i-choose-lua-for-this-blog.html)**

Since [Version 4](/src/journal/2024/08/version-4.md) I've been using
[Lume](https://lume.land) to build this site, and though it's generally pretty
great, I am occassionally concerned about the amount of TypeScript dependencies
that I pull in every time Lume is updated. Something like Andre Garzia's
homegrown, low-dependency blogging software has a certain appeal to it: knowing
in more detail what you're depending, and that it won't change very often. In
the distant future, if I ever do get around to building my own website
generator, these are concerns that will be top of mind. Relatedly, as a
programming language nerd, I find the appealing of a slowly developing, mostly
language very appealing. I think that some languages (Java comes to mind) should
be frozen once they get to some "good enough" point, rather than continually
evolving and sprouting new features.

**[The Partially Dynamic
Web](https://digitalflapjack.com/blog/the-partially-dynamic-web/)**

Continuing on the topic of rolling your own website software, Michael Winston
Dales describes his motivation and solution for going from a purely-static
Hugo-based site to a slightly more dynamic one. Dales' main motivation is to
more efficiently handle large amounts of images. As I get more into photography,
I'm starting to think about how I can start adding images to my journal entries,
or have galleries of images, without too much manual effort, or slowing down the
site's  build process. This also makes me wonder how static site generators can
better support "partially dynamic" features. Yet another thing to think about
for my future-website-generator project.
    
**[Life in Code](https://www.mcdbooks.com/books/life-in-code)** by Ellen Ullman

Part memoir, part snapshots of life in the software industry, and part social
commentary, this book is a must-read for anyone who wants an inside look at the
software industry from a unique perspective. Ullman's personal anecdotes are
interesting and often entertaining, but her thoughts on how the internet will
lead to the spread of misinformation and decline of communities are prescient by
several decades.

<hr />

In the process of writing this, I realized I don't like how the links and their
descriptions look, so there will probably be some CSS hackery in my near future.
I suspect that in the process, the limitations of Markdown will cause me more
frustration and make me wonder once more if I should just write HTML5 directly.
I also really want to have a non-chronological notes section (for documenting
things like the aforementioned move to Lightroom), but I will inevitably
overthink and over-engineer what that looks like. Webweaving can be such an
addictive hobby, one thing always leads to a whole bunch more.


