---
published: "2021-10-10"
date: "2021-10-10"
title: Sunday Selection 2021-10-10
tags: ["Sundays", "Books"]
---

Summer is saying goodbye here in New England, there are pops of red and yellow
among the green and the weather is starting to get cooler (while staying more
cloudy than I would like it to be). To me, summer felt like a long period of
rest, and though COVID still abounds, life is more normal now than not. I have
something of a social life again, I’m going out to restaurants (though
preferably outdoors, while the weather holds up), and I’m going in to a physical
office a couple days a week. Life finds a way.

Today, we have a couple of closely related articles, and after a long time, some
book talk. By the way, I realized that I have access to a New York Times
subscription via my institution, so expect to see more links to their articles
in the future. Since they will be paywalled to most readers, I’ll try to keep
them from taking up too much space.

**[Keep Track of the Tiny
Details](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/11/at-home/newsletter.html "Keep Track
of the Tiny Details") and [Keep Keeping a
Logbook](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/08/at-home/newsletter.html "Keep
Keeping a Logbook")**

The first of these was from the beginning of the pandemic, when as the sameness
of the days kept building, time seemed to become meaningless. The second is from
now, when I, for one, have been having a hard time readjusting to the flow of
time, and trying to keep at bay the feeling of it slipping through my fingers
like so much time. Like the author I find keeping a log of some sort to be
helpful. One day I might go back through them and take a look at all the
entries, but for now it reminds me that today I did and experienced things I did
not yesterday.

**[The Inner Ring of the
Internet](https://every.to/divinations/the-inner-ring-of-the-internet "The Inner
Ring of the Internet") and [Rewilding Your
Attention](https://uxdesign.cc/rewilding-your-attention-d518ede18855 "Rewilding
Your Attention")**

Attention is, of course, intimately related to the passage of time. After all,
what is attention but the investment of time (intentionally or not)? These days,
as the ills of algorithmic social media become increasingly apparent, reclaiming
our attention seems to be coming to the forefront of our collective
consciousness. As these posts tell us, being aware of where our attention is and
why is crucial, both in terms of creation and consumption. In particular, while
algorithms may be tuned to show us what’s popular, that’s not necessarily the
same as what’s *good* or *important*.

**[Epicene design information](https://klim.co.nz/blog/epicene-design-information/
"Epicene design information")**

The unassuming title of this articles belies the rich treasure trove of history
and culture that it contains. I am certainly a type nerd, though I’m not always
interested in the history behind particular designs or trends. But this piece
managed to weave together the history of a set of typefaces, the social,
economic and political contexts surrounding them, and placed them in relevant
cultural contexts of gender and changing tastes. It’s a long read, but very much
worth it.

**[The Lonely City](https://www.olivialaing.com/lonely-city "The Lonely City") by
Olivia Laing**

I finally managed to finish Olivia Laing’s wonderful book on loneliness, which
as I’ve mentioned before, defies neat summarization. It’s a memoir, a history
book, cultural and artistic critique, and much more than the sum of its parts.
Though maybe not quite as relevant as it was a year ago, I think we will come to
look at it as being essentially timeless.

I decided to revisit my youth by picking up a copy of the Silmarillion that I’m
now pouring through. That being said, I think I ought to finally read Dune
before the movie comes out.
