---
published: "2024-03-02"
date: "2024-03-02"
title: RSS Cleanup
description: So many feeds, so little time
tags: ["Reading", "Feedbin", "Reeder", "RSS"]
---

I decided to start the new month by doing some clean, in this case, cleaning up
my RSS feeds. For a while now I've been using [Feedbin](https://feedbin.com) as
the "backend", to fetch the feeds from sources. I use [Reeder
5](https://reederapp.com), mainly on my iPad mini, but also sometimes on my
phone and MacBook, to actually read said feeds. As a setup it works great,
especially since from Reeder I can easily save links to Apple Notes if I want to
refer to them later. But for a while I've been subscribed to too many feeds,
many of which I don't read on a regular basis, and have accumulated a backlog
that I'm not interested in going through. The way I organized feeds into folders
had also become unsatisfactory, as I put new feeds into places that didn't quite
work, or the content of the feeds changed. So I did a thorough cleanup of my
feeds in a couple of steps:

## Remove Broken, Silent and Uninteresting Feeds

First I went through my feeds and removed any feeds that were either broken, or
simply had not received any updates in a long time. Feedbin makes the first part
easy by showing which feeds are broken and offering to remove them at the click
of a button. I then went through the feeds manually and removed feeds that
hadn't updated in a while. I removed any feeds that hadn't updated in a year (so
any time in 2023). Some of these had last updated in 2021, so there was really
no reason to keep them around. I know that one of the benefits of RSS is that I
don't miss updates from sites that only occasionally update. But for my feeds, I
didn't see any that updated so infrequently and that I wanted to read. I did
this step manually, but I realize now that Feedbin lets me sort feeds by both
volume and last update when managing them. I could have used that to make this
step faster. Finally, I removed feeds that I no longer find interesting. Most of
them were random news sites, or personal blogs that I never actually read and
aren't aligned with my interests at the moment.

This step reduced the number of feeds I was subscribed to from about 100 to
about 70. That's almost a one-third reduction, and the completionist in me feels
much better knowing that feeds I won't read are gone.


## Reorganize Feeds into Folders

Both Feedbin and Reeder support simple organization (though the UI for both
leaves much to be deserved). Feedbin calls them tags, and Reedbin calls them
folders, but they work the same and seem to sync together without issue. I'm
going to call them folders because that's how I think about and use them. I had
a number of folders previously which made sense when I first came up with them.
But over time they've become less useful, because either I've added feeds into
folders whose names don't quite reflect what's in the feed, or the authors have
changed what they post about, also making the folder names inaccurate.

I've ended up with the following folders:

  - **Academic** for both blogs from fellow academics, as well as for sites that
    post long and in-depth articles backed by lots of thought and research.
  - **Daily** for blogs that update more-or-less daily, or multiple times a day.
  - **People** for blogs written by interesting individuals about things in
    their lives, usually spanning a range of topics.
  - **Philosophy** for, well, philosophy, but also advice and self-help blogs.
  - **Programming** for blogs that mostly post some kind of technical content,
    usually about computers, programming and related topics.
  - **Stationery** for blogs related to stationery (pens, paper, notebooks and
    the like).
  - **Misc** for feeds that don't neatly fit into any of the other categories.


This organization is imperfect. For example, [Kottke.org](https://kottke.org),
[Scripting News](https://scripting.com), and a couple other personal blogs are
under Daily, even though they're mostly written by one person and cover a range
of topics. But this structure is good enough that I'm confident I won't feel the
need to do a major re-arrangement in the near future.

## Declare RSS Bankruptcy

For various reasons, I check my feeds much less frequently than I used to even a
couple of years ago. It's not unusual for me to go a couple days without
checking during the week, and then spending a couple hours reading over the
weekend. As a result, a lot of the feeds have built up a backlog of posts that I
will never actually get around to reading. So for a bunch of feeds, I declared
"bankruptcy" and simply hit the "Mark All as Read" button. These are mostly the
personal blogs that are updated daily, but also a number of the more technical
blogs that I know I won't have the patience or desire to wade through. In the
future, I'm hoping to have the courage to do this on a more regular basis.

<hr />

It took a couple hours to get through all of that, (including stopping to read
some posts along the way). My feeds are now more indicative of my current
interests, and I'm hoping that the re-organization will make it easier to read
the most relevant things in the limited time I have for it. Did I need to do
this? Not really, but I believe that we should pay some attention to what
information we consume, just as we are careful of what food we eat.

In case you're interested in what I read, a list of my feeds is [available as an
OPML file](/static/2024-03.opml). Yes, I realize the irony of posting about
organizing my RSS feeds when this journal doesn't have an RSS feed, but I'm
working on that.
