---
published: "2024-02-18"
date: "2024-02-18"
title: Sunday Selection 2024-02-18
description: LLMs, modern payment systems, and the Avatar returns
tags: ["Sundays", "LLMs", "Television"]
---

Another year, another attempt to blog on a more regular basis. Life has been
pretty hectic the last few years, and it doesn't seem like that's going to let
up anytime soon. Over the last few years I've developed a tendency to pull
inward, to spend most of my time in my own head, exploring my own thoughts and
emotions, rather than engaging with the outside world. This has certainly been
partially due to the isolation of COVID-19, moving out to a solo apartment, then
to a more remote and rural area, and spending most of my time alone. Part of it,
I think, was a real need to dive deep into myself at this point in my life, and
emerge a different, better person. However, I'm feeling this desire diminish,
being replaced by a desire to be "out there", to engage more with the world,
live more publicly in a way. And a key part of that is writing and publishing
more, both formally and informally. I might write a more extended post on this
later, but for now, this Selection will have to do.

**[Resisting Deterministic
Thinking](https://zephoria.medium.com/resisting-deterministic-thinking-52ef8d78248c
"Resisting Deterministic Thinking")**

**[Large language models will change programming a
little](https://medium.com/bits-and-behavior/large-language-models-will-change-programming-a-little-81445778d957
"Large language models will change programming a little")**

I'm finally beginning to dive into the growth of Large Language Models (LLMs)
over the past couple of years. At this point, I think we have enough evidence to
suggest that LLMs and other AI innovations will have at least some measurable
impact on society, people and the economy. But while we explore these brave new
worlds, either as creators of such technologies, or simply as people affected by
them, it's important to keep a level head, especially since powerful parties
have vested interests in driving up the hype.

To that end, two articles: one about having a measured response to the
proliferation in AI in general, the second about doing the same for programmers
in particular. One day I will have the time and energy to articulate my own
thoughts on these matters, but today is not that day.

**[India's UPI is beating blockchain in the payments
game](https://fortune.com/2022/06/30/blockchain-india-upi-payments-global-reach/
"India's UPI is beating blockchain in the payments game")**

When I went back to India last year, I had the chance to experience India's
Unified Payment Interface. It's essentially a protocol for moving money between
bank accounts, financial service providers and apps like Google Pay. It's been
interesting to see how much India's economy is now online and goes through UPI.
Whether it was buying bathroom fixtures for my parent's apartment, or paying our
taxi driver when we went on vacation, UPI has streamlined payments in a way I've
never experienced in the US (for most of my time here, I've paid rent with
physical paper cheques). While the previous hype technology (blockchains) to be
heading towards a quiet death, it's good to see a practical solution like UPI
thriving and integrating with existing institutions and systems.


**[Avatar: The Last Airbender](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ByAn8DF8Ykk
"Avatar: The Last Airbender")**

<iframe width="560" height="315"
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ByAn8DF8Ykk?si=L537cAfhNJtAO9tJ"
title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay;
clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share"
allowfullscreen></iframe>

I came pretty late to Avatar, but I loved it since I saw it. When I grow up, I
want to be Uncle Iroh. Its status as a "global phenomenon", as Netflix calls it,
is well-deserved. While the anime was great, we all wish that its previous live
action incarnation could be scrubbed from our collective consciousness. My first
reaction to this trailer was to ask my friends what the opposite of "cautiously
optimistic" was, since that was how I felt about it (I was told "once burnt,
twice shy" was appropriate in this case). While the trailer seems to be pretty
faithful to the source material, the fact that the original creators left
partway through due to creative difference means that I won't be getting my
hopes up. I would love to be proved wrong though, and so too, I think, would all
of us.
